---
layout: default
---

# Assignment 1: Exploratory Data Analysis

### Date Assigned:

### Date Due:

### Objective: 
You will gain experience exploring a scientific dataset without developing code or using an advanced data visualization system.  You will be exploring a subset of the NOAA National Hurricane Center's HURDAT2 dataset, which is available in the resources section of the course website.  You will explore the dataset using a basic spreadsheet application (e.g., MS Excel, Pages, Google Spreadsheet) and complete a report on your findings and experience.

### Dataset:
We will be using the NOAA NHC's HURDAT2 dataset, which is available in the resources section of the course website.  The original HURDAT2 dataset is described in detail at https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/#hurdat.  We created a subset of the original HURDAT2 dataset to include records from 2005 through 2017.  The data are stored in a comma-separated value (CSV) text file to make it easier to read.  This file can be opened in Excel or another spreadsheet application to support your analysis tasks.  The first line of the CSV file contains the names for each column.

### Instructions:
You will turn in a report for this assignment with four sections.  The sections will correspond to the four tasks listed below:
1. List (bullet list of items) four analytic queries or questions that a person may have about this data set. These would be questions that an analyst examining the data might be pondering.
2. List (bullet list of items) four “insights”, chunks of knowledge, or deeper questions that you either encountered or gained while exploring the data. An insight could be some understanding of the data and its characteristics that is not relatively obvious or intuitive. It is something that most people might not realize initially. Note that an insight or knowledge chunk simply may be a deeper question that arose in your mind while exploring the data. And your analysis may not have been sufficient to answer that question.  Bear in mind that we don't expect you to be hurricane experts, so approaching the problem from a somewhat naive data scientist perspective is acceptable.
3. Write one paragraph about the process you used to do the exploration and analysis. Did you load the data into Excel, work manually, or do both? What did you do in Excel? Did you draw pictures? Just tell us (briefly) what you did.
4. Write one paragraph about challenges or problems that you encountered in doing the analysis this way. Did anything limit or frustrate you? If nothing did, perhaps there was something that was more difficult than you thought it should be. Nothing is perfect, so you should be able to list some potential issues here.
  
So, to sum up, your assignment report should have four sections: two bullet lists of four items followed by three paragraphs. You should add supporting pictures or figures to your report to support your discussion.  You must label and caption each figure and refer for the figure in the narrative of the report (e.g., Figure 1  This figure shows the inverse relationship between wind and pressure for a subset of the data from 2014 to 2015).
  
### Grading:
The assignment score is out of a maximum of 10 points. We will evaluate the quality of the insights you listed. We are looking for things that we find interesting or perhaps unexpected. This is subjective. For the second and third parts, we will evaluate if you did what the assignment asked.

### Submission:
This is an individual assignment. You may not work in groups. Your completed assignment is due on Tuesday, January 4, 2019 by 11:59 PM. We will be discussing submissions in class, so be sure to avoid a late submission.
	-You must submit your assignment using Canvas. Please upload a single pdf file named using the pattern “utkid a1.pdf” (replacing “utkid” with your UTK network login - this is the same as your @utk email address, not a numeric id number).


