---
layout: default
---

# Assignment 2: Data Visualization Design

### Date Assigned:
### Date Due:

### Objective:
You will gain experience designing a low-fidelity prototype of an interactive data visualization tool without developing code.  Building off the insight you gains in assignment 1, use a graphics program (e.g., Powerpoint, Google Slides, OmniGraffle, Photoshop) or simply draw by hand a mockup of a data visualization system.  You will describe the plans for making the system interactive and relate your design to challenges you faced in assignment 1.  You will submit a report with your results.

### Dataset:
We will be using the NOAA NHC's HURDAT2 dataset, which is available in the resources section of the course website.  The original HURDAT2 dataset is described in detail at https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/#hurdat.  We created a subset of the original HURDAT2 dataset to include records from 2005 through 2017.  The data are stored in a comma-separated value (CSV) text file to make it easier to read.  This file can be opened in Excel or another spreadsheet application.  The first line of the CSV file contains the names for each column.

### Instructions:
You will turn in a report for this assignment with two sections.  The sections will correspond to the two tasks listed below:
1. Using a graphics program or drawing by hand, design a low-fidelity prototype of a data visualization tool for analyzing the HURDAT2 dataset.  Your design should use at least two different views of the data (e.g., map view and a multivariate view).  You don't have to provide working code or implement a system.  Notional visualizations of the data are fine for the purposes of illustrating your design.  However, your design should reflect attention to detail and it should be clear how your design would look if you implemented it.  Show the design as figures appropriately labeled and captions.  For each design, tell me what data you are encoding, how the different visualizations will be linked, and how the user can interact with the views to explore the data.  For this task, we recommend thinking of some aspect of the dataset that you will to illuminate.  We only require on prototype design, but you are encouraged to think about at least one alternative design.
2. Using bullet points, briefly describe how your design addresses challenges and insights you gained in in assignment 1 where you explored the HURDAT2 dataset.  Be specific and relate your discussion to the prototype figures shown in your report.

So, to sum up, your assignment report should have two sections: one section showing and describing your design prototype and another section relating your design to challenges and insights gains in assignment 1. You should add supporting pictures or figures to your report to support your discussion.  You must label and caption each figure and refer for the figure in the narrative of the report (e.g., Figure 1  This figure shows the inverse relationship between wind and pressure for a subset of the data from 2014 to 2015).

### Grading:
The assignment score is out of a maximum of 10 points. We will evaluate the quality of the prototype designs and discussion you provide. We are looking for creative approaches and evidence that you applied what you learned from exploring the data to your prototype designs. This is subjective.

### Submission:
This is an individual assignment. You may not work in groups. Your completed assignment is due on Tuesday, January 4, 2019 by 11:59 PM. We will be discussing submissions in class, so be sure to avoid a late submission.
	- You must submit your assignment using Canvas. Please upload a single pdf file named using the pattern “utkid a2.pdf” (replacing “utkid” with your UTK network login - this is the same as your @utk email address, not a numeric id number).
