---
layout: default
---

# Assignment 3: Basic Data Visualization Implementation

### Date Assigned:
### Date Due:

### Objective:

You will develop an interactive, multivariate data visualization for the Web.  Specifically, you will develop a scatterplot visualization that encodes three variables from the NOAA NHC HURDAT2 dataset.  You will submit a report with your results, your source code, and a URL to a working version of the data visualization.

### Dataset: 
We will be using the NOAA NHC's HURDAT2 dataset, which is available in the resources section of the course website.  The original HURDAT2 dataset is described in detail at https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/#hurdat.  We created a subset of the original HURDAT2 dataset to include records from 2005 through 2017.  The data are stored in a comma-separated value (CSV) text file to make it easier to read.  This file can be opened in Excel or another spreadsheet application.  The first line of the CSV file contains the names for each column.

### Instructions: 
Complete the follow steps using either p5.js or d3.js:
1. Write a program that reads the HURDAT2 CSV file.  
2. Choose two variables (columns) in the dataset and display a bi-variate scatterplot.  Label the x and y axes with variable names.  Also, show a title for the plot.
3. Write code to capture the mouse movements within the plot.  Map the mouse location to the value space of the x and y axes and print these values somewhere in your plot (preferably somewhere on the x and y axes).  
4. Implement at least one of the following features:
		- Color the scatterplot points using a third variable
		- Use the radius of the circle to represent a third variable
		- Allow the user to drag a box in the plot to select a subset of points (that fall within the box) and color the selected and unselected points differently (e.g., blue for selected and gray for unselected)
5. Now use the scatterplot to find two interesting patterns in the data.  For example, what is the relationship between wind speed and pressure?  For each pattern, write a paragraph (4 - 6 sentences) describing the pattern and how you discovered it.  Include a screen capture for each insight.  As always, label and provide a caption for each figure.  Use concepts that we have discussed in class in your descriptions.  We encourage you to be brief with your descriptions but be sure you provide enough evidence and discussion to convince us about the insight.

So, to sum up, your assignment report should have four sections: a screen shot after task 2, a screen shot after task 3, a screen shot after task 4, and a section with two paragraphs and figures describing your insights. You must label and caption each figure and refer for the figure in the narrative of the report (e.g., Figure 1  This figure shows the inverse relationship between wind and pressure for a subset of the data from 2014 to 2015).

### Grading: 
The assignment score is out of a maximum of 10 points. We will evaluate the quality of the visualization implementation and insight discussions you provide. This is subjective.

### Submission: 
**This is an individual assignment.** You may not work in groups. Your completed assignment is due on Tuesday, January 4, 2019 by 11:59 PM. We will be discussing submissions in class, so be sure to avoid a late submission.

You must submit your assignment using Canvas. Please upload a single zip file named using the pattern “utkid a3.zip" (replacing “utkid” with your UTK network login - this is the same as your @utk email address, not a numeric id number).  Include your report as a pdf file within the zip file.

